hello and welcome to the program I'm
Samantha Simmons we start in the Middle
East and the Israeli military says its
forces have taken control of the
Palestinian side of the Rafa Crossing
which borders Egypt and Southern Gaza
these are the latest pictures that show
the view at the Crossing from on board
an Israeli military vehicle Aid
organizations operating there say the
flow of Aid into the territory through
the crossing has now stopped Israel
continued to bombard Rafa overnight
after rejecting his T5 proposal which
was put forward by International
mediators and agreed by Hamas Israel
says the plan doesn't meet its core
demands Israel is though sending a
delegation to indirect talks in
Cairo well we've had this update from
our correspondent fergo Keen in
Jerusalem they haven't had reason to
dance for a long
time but they haven't forgotten
[Music]
how even amid uncertainty about isra 's
position Hope
Springs across Gaza BBC journalists
captured the
reaction of those convinced perhaps
prematurely that a ceasefire will
happen the feeling is Indescribable
we're so happy we're going back to our
home in Gaza
City we're refugees from the north and
we fled here this young man says we're
so happy there's a
ceasefire Israelis are still absorbing
the news it came late on one of this
society's most important days when
across the country Sirens bring the
nation to a halt in memory of the dead
of the Holocaust a day of reflection in
a country traumatized by the Hamas
attack last
[Music]
October tonight on the streets of Tel
Aviv those who believe healing that
trauma can begin with a ceasefire deal
and the release of Israel's
hostages he expect from the Israeli
government to take this field to save
all the remaining hostages who are still
alive but after 7 months of a war in
which Israel's Army pledged to destroy
Hamas a ceasefire deal that fails to
accomplish that risks breaking Israel's
wartime coalition government
Israel will send negotiators to talks
but won't stop fighting
yet we examine every proposal very
seriously and we review every
possibility on the issue of negotiations
and the return of the hostages to their
homes as quickly as possible and as a
central task at the same time we carry
on with our operations in the Gaza Strip
and will continue to do so the people of
Eastern Rafa woke to leaflets telling
them to
evacuate many have been displaced before
but still they were told to
leave everyone no matter how
old how
young or how
vulnerable to Al maasi Israel says and
other desolate places Beyond
Rafa the so-called humanitarian zones
were to be
expanded but they've never been safe
from
sickness hunger or
[Music]
War this is the aftermath of raids on
Rafa last
night people hope these may have been
some of the last air strikes if the
ceasefire can be made to work news of
the Hamas announcement was still hours
away n Raja mother and
Refugee for seven months this has been
the daily
reality hany ashtar an orphan grieved by
his relative
re his family was killed during the war
she says even he was
killed so many here are grieving and
exhausted late tonight Israel attacked
Eastern Rafa where they told people to
leave celebration had turned to
fear and the hope that tomorrow might
bring peace fergal Keen BBC News
Jerusalem let's show you the scene live
in Rafa right now where we can smoke uh
rise into the air there this comes after
the Israeli Defense Forces said it does
have operational control of the Garen
side of the ra acrossing following the
announcement that the IDF was targeted
targeting having targeted strikes
against Hamas in eastern Rafa well in
the past few hours the military have
said that their forces were scanning the
area after launching this ground and air
operation in parts of Eastern Rafa on
Monday this is as we know a diplomatic
efforts are continuing to try and
achieve a new truce well let's speak to
Lise wridge from unra who joins me now
from Rafa uh Louise welcome to you tell
us what the situation is there right now
where you
are yeah things are very tense here in
Rafa um the last 24 hours have been a
complete roller coaster of emotion even
the last few days there was so much hope
for uh ceasefire anybody you speak to
here the last week the last few months
every every day all they want to know is
when there is a ceasefire coming and
it's what everybody has been hoping for
so to wake up yesterday morning to the
devastating news that leaflets had been
dropped and an evacuation order was in
place it really Spread spread a lot of
fear across the community um I'm
currently in Western Rafa but across
Eastern Rafa people started to move but
even outside my window I was able to see
people starting to take down their
makeshift shelters start to pack up and
start to leave Rafa so there's a lot of
fear spreading throughout the day you
could see more and more people starting
to to move starting to leave um and then
last night you know out of seemingly
nowhere you know for myself the first I
heard of it was screaming and cheering
out of the window um I was completely
overcome with with emotion everyone
around you know you could see women and
children hugging each other crying
families coming together just this
outpour of relief that people have held
for so long at the hope of a potential
ceasefire uh and then today this morning
very subdued very quiet as the day has
gone on I've seen again more and more
Vehicles move out of the Rafa area as
people are packing up their things and
leaving so there is a sense of fear and
Chaos now obviously this is a a minute
by minute hour by hour situation
developing um but clearly people are
hearing the situation at the Raffa
border crossing and now deciding to to
leave once again and and tell us what
the aid situation is like because more
Aid had been getting in in the past few
weeks hadn't it what's this Aid
situation there
now so there is now no Aid entering the
Gaza Strip the Raffa Crossing is the
biggest and the only entry that unra the
the largest humanitarian agency here in
Gaza has been using and now there is no
Aid able to get in and in addition to
that there is also no fuel so fuel is
really what the agencies need to run
this massive humanitarian operation
across the Gaza Strip fuel is what's
needed to to run the trucks to get the
aid to the people who need it fuel is
needed in the generators to run the
hospitals and and health clinics that
are remaining and not damaged and
destroyed so without this Fuel and
without this aid supplies the aid
operation here is is simply going to
ground to a Hal what is the aid
operation like at the
moment um we continue to do everything
we can our colleagues are providing
Services unra runs Health Centers across
the Gaza Strip um even in North Gaza we
have some very heroic colleagues who
have maintained running these Health
Services throughout the war so we do our
best to provide these these services and
provide what Aid we have but it's very
concerning to know that this border
crossing is is closed and that there is
no foreseeable Aid entering anytime soon
okay thank you very much for telling us
about the situation where you are Louise
wridge from unra who is in Rafa thank
you
well let's get more on this with our
correspondent in Jerusalem yolan now
yand welcome to you what are the
authorities there saying about why
they've closed the crossing or taking
control of this Crossing uh between
Egypt and Rafa and about the IDF
operation in
Rafa so the Israeli Army has put out
footage that shows these Israeli tanks
rolling into this key crossing the Rafa
Crossing between uh Gaza and Egypt it
says it's taken operational control
there um and it's dealing it says with
Hamas uh terrorists infrastructure to
use its language in that area it says
it's killed 20 Hamas terrorists um
overnight and that it has also found
three uh tunnel shafts um and it's
linking operations around uh this part
of Rafa to the rocket fire that it says
uh came from this area Fried by Hamas um
on Sunday which killed four Israeli
soldiers close to the Kem Shalom
Crossing leading to the closure of that
important Crossing in the south of the
Gaza Strip as well um now at the moment
when we're taking briefings from the
Israeli military they're stressing that
this is a very precise it's a limited uh
operation they're not putting a time
frame on it um they said too that they
are working to reopen the Kem Shalom
Crossing um as security allows and tell
us more about this potential ceasefire
deal which Hamas said it supports Israel
says it goes a long way from meeting its
demands we understand that unofficial
talks are still going to take place
today in Cairo what more do we know
about
that well at the moment this ceasefire
deal is really hanging in the balance
because of the different positions we
had you know that declaration from Hamas
was quite dramatic saying it agreed to
what the mediators have proposed uh
Israel coming out quickly um and uh
denying that this was The Proposal that
it had signed up to saying that there
were um differences from its core
demands but we also have had confusingly
some officials coming out and saying No
this is actually very similar um to the
proposal that was put forward by Israel
itself at the end of last month um it
does seem really that the fundamental
difficulty for Israel is signing up to
any kind of a phase deal of a ceasefire
and hostage release that will ultimately
lead to an end to hostilities an end to
this war before in the eyes of the uh
Israeli government it has achieved its
War aim of dismantling Hamas in Gaza it
said that is necessary to have a victory
in this war